You here sincere while, okay.
That's, that's better. Right?
Okay. Good afternoon, gentlemen.
Hi there. How we doing? Afternoon.
Good to see you here. Um, look, we've got your, um,
submission so you can take that as read.
Uh, but what we'd like it if, um, is if you could, uh, speak
to the points you wanna make.
Um, I'll give you a yell
when it's about three minutes to go.
We've got you 10 minutes, but we do like to ask questions.
So, um, the more time you give us questions,
the more likely we are to ask lots of questions,
so in your hands.
Thank you. Okay.
So ki good afternoon, select committee chair
and, uh, members, firstly, thank you.
Thank you for the work that you're doing, um,
that you're putting into this review.
Thanks also for the opportunity to present this afternoon.
I really appreciate it. So with me here,
I've got Steve Kensington, uh,
he is the Gil Trapp Group, CEO.
I've got Kurt Schmid, he's the Gil Trap Group,
general Manager of Finance, and myself
and Greg European Motor Distributors, uh, homologation
and Business Quality Manager.
So we are here on behalf of the Gil Trapp Group.
Uh, one of New Zealand's largest automotive organizations
employing around a thousand people across our importer
and retail operations.
We represent 20 automotive brands, um,
from affordable high volume, uh, vehicles through
to aspirational marks.
And we are very closely connected to a wide network
of dealer partners and our collective customers.
Clean Vehicle Standard already has a significant impact on
our brands and the businesses that we represent, uh,
and on the customers that we serve.
Also, that impact will further in 2026
as tighter targets take effect
and the proposed amendments will compound it even more.
Our focus today is on ensuring the standard continues
to reduce emissions in a way that's fair, practical,
and sustainable for all key reefs.
The Clean Vehicle standard plays an important role in
reducing fleet CO2 emissions,
but it has to be fair, it has to be workable
and it has to encourage genuine
decarbonization over the long term.
It cannot distort the market
or load costs unevenly on certain kiwis
who have a genuine need for a specific vehicle.
At present, the Clean Vehicle Standard is struggling
to cut emissions as it was designed to, uh,
because it only regulates supply without a mechanism
to drive cus consumer demand,
the system cannot deliver the shift in CO2
that it was intended to.
As outlined in our submission, we support extending the life
of credits to four years.
This increases certainty and flexibility.
We also support extending borrowing provisions beyond 2025.
This gives importers the confidence to plan.
However, we remain opposed to opening credit transfers
between new and used importers, uh, at a two
for one exchange rate.
This has the potential to create arbitrage
and to undermined investment in lower emission vehicles
and fair competition.
It could also drive up the price
of credits making compliance harder
and more expensive for new importers and their customers.
We also remain strongly opposed to the removal
of weight adjusted targets
or the removal of the legislative requirement
to factor vehicle weight into CO2 targets.
Weight adjustment ensures fairness.
Small vehicles compared with small vehicles
and large vehicles with large vehicles
and targets are set based on the workload
capability of the vehicle.
Removing weight adjustment will result in significant cost
increase that will be passed on to consumers.
This will punish families
and businesses who genuinely need larger vehicles while
simultaneously stripping away credits from EVs.
Now to get a little technical, the positive correlation
between CO2
and vehicle weight known as the slope of the line will shift
to negative at relatively low EV uptake.
But true balance, when EV credits can offset debits doesn't
occur until EVs make up a far higher percentage of sales.
Removing weight adjustment at the slope
of the line flip point would therefore punish families
and businesses for years
before consumer demand for EVs enough is enough
to be give genuine balance.
So in closing, we support flexibility measures
that make the system more workable,
providing a clear pathway to carbon reduction.
We strongly urge the committee
to retain weight adjusted targets to preserve fairness
and credibility, to reconsider credit transfers between new
and used to prevent the possibility
of market gaming and distortion.
And to consider implementing appropriate
demand-based mechanisms.
To balance the clean vehicle standard,
we need a clean vehicle standard
that actually reduces emissions, not one
that distorts the market, punishes families
and incentivizes the retention
of older higher emission vehicles.
Thank you. And we can take any
questions that you have, Greg.
Okay, my first question from Dan. Hey, thanks Mr. Chair.
Thanks Greg for your submission.
Um, just in your recommendations, 0.7,
you mentioned realigning New Zealand's climate ambitions
to follow tests and proven programs in other markets.
Could you explain what you mean by that?
Um, and yeah, definitely in particularly the other markets.
Thank you, minister. Um, yeah, so there are,
there are markets around the world that have, um,
slightly better proven ambitions in this space.
Um, we get the feeling that in New Zealand we're trying
to be a little bit, um, ambitious ahead of where the market
actually is and where, um, Kiwi's demands
for low emission vehicles are.
Uh, and this is creating a little bit of a disparity.
So, um, slowing down a little bit,
perhaps following Australia
or some of the other markets that, uh, um,
are moving a little more deliberately
and slowly, I think would be, would be advisable.
So, Australia, any, any,
any other specific market
examples that we should be looking at?
Um, Australia is probably the, the one that aligns mostly
with, um, Kiwi situation.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
So it just in simple terms,
and we've heard this already today, what is,
what you're saying that the, the vehicles that are available
are not meeting the standard?
If you go across the, all the nature
of the different types of vehicles there are.
'cause not everybody wants a, you know, a, a very small car.
Um, uh, the, the, the availability of those vehicles, um,
does not match the, the standards which are being expected.
I, I'd probably suggest more that the demand
of New Zealanders doesn't match what the regulation
or what the standard is trying to achieve.
Okay, well that, well that means, yeah.
So effectively what that means is your, for you will be, if,
if New Zealand's had to follow that, we'd be trying
to force people into vehicles
that are not necessarily the vehicles that they want.
Yeah, correct. Yeah.
So the, the other thing which we've heard, um, earlier,
I just want your, um, observations on this is
that there are now, uh, we're somewhat awash,
I think was the word, which was used with,
um, really small cars.
Um, but we're kind of running out of people movers.
Is that, is that fair reflection?
In other words, the, the market basically
we've imported all these vehicles.
Um, people said we want, we wanna buy,
we wanna buy a whole lot of people movers.
Uh, we're not so interested in the smaller cars,
so now the smaller cars are sitting on the lots,
but the people movers have all gone.
Steve, I could probably get you
to comment on that a we bit.
Um,
I I'm not simplifying, but
Yeah, I I'm not suggesting I I wouldn't suggest
they were actually seeing that.
Um, um, I, I don't think there is the demand for small cars.
I think there's the, there's the demand
for small cars in heavily congested metropolitan areas,
but I don't think there is, um, outside of, um,
potentially Auckland, maybe Wellington, um,
to a lesser degree, but definitely the SUV sector is one
that continues to grow.
Um, and you know, what we are seeing is coming out
of the manufacturers is more hybrid, super hybrid technology
that is heavier, um, which, you know, does have a negative,
a correlation to what's tr what's being proposed.
So, you know, I think, you know, we,
I think we are moving towards a lower emission environment,
um, but not, not maybe as quickly as we, um,
you know, would like, and the manufacturers are dictating
that to us in terms of what they're gonna build.
I think that's what, so thank you for that.
I'll, I'll take Julianne and Carlos
and we've got about two and a bit minutes left.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I was wondering if you could expand on recommendation
six, which is introducing demand focused initiatives
to steer consumer choice.
Um, I mean, do you think it would be helpful if there was
some sort of price incentive, uh, such as there was
with the clean car discount, which helped, um,
which had quite a substantive impact on consumer demand?
Uh, I think far greater so that
actually the importers were overshooting the
targets when it came
to the standard for the first few years.
But now that there's nothing there do,
are there other things government could do,
like using government procurement for example, to, um,
accelerate or increase the demand for, uh,
low emissions vehicles that would help, uh,
you balance the imports?
Thank you. Uh, yes, we, we would suggest that there are, I
as a group, we don't really think
that the clean vehicle discount was the right mechanism,
but there are some that could be considered.
Um, we can, looking at the moment at the,
the rux across the board, so road user charges, um,
as opposed to fuel taxes, um, that could be prorated, uh,
based on CO2 output of the, of the vehicle.
Uh, another possibility would be vehicle licensing.
Um, there could be a, a charger vehicle licensing,
and this way we capture everyone who is contributing to CO2,
not just the person who is,
is buying a late model low machine vehicle.
Um, so there's a couple po couple of possibilities
that would help to, um, steer consumer demand. I
Think we also did see a bit of a sugar rush, um, initially
with the, um, with the incentives to purchase ev.
Um, and I say that
because, um, you know, when those were taken away,
we were actually selling vehicles well below, um,
what the incentive was on a vehicle.
Um, and, and sales were particularly hard to come by.
So the,
the customer was potentially significantly better off, um,
on a true retail price with the,
with the supply exceeding demand.
And um, you know, we still struggled to sell, um,
EVs into the marketplace.
So, so I do think that, I think it was sort
of misaligned in terms of we saw a, we saw a big impact
to start with and then it fell off quite quickly. I think I
Hit a bit of a cap.
Yeah, look, I think folks we're gonna, um, say have
to say thank you there 'cause we're gonna move on to our,
our next minute, but we, uh, you're very welcome
to stay online and we appreciated that.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you Carlos.
We'll go next time. Would you first up? Sure. Okay. Right.
Uh, now we have got Ford Motor Company again via Zoom.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon. I am Elise.
Hello. Right again, uh,
we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, you can take your submission
as read anything you wanna highlight, go for it.
I'll let you know when there's about three minutes to go.
Um, but we like asking questions, so, um, uh,
if you can leave time for questions, we appreciate that.
So good news. That'll be about four minutes
and we'll leave six minutes for questions.
Uh, so first I queue everyone, uh, Elise
called Managing Director Board Motor Company New Zealand.
Uh, so firstly, thanks for the opportunity to discuss
with your permission and the land transport clean
vehicle Standard Amendment bill.
Uh, we've been part of the New Zealand community
for over 117 years.
We're the oldest car vehicle brand here
and have a proud heritage across our Tiera supporting
families, businesses, and critical industries to grow.
We employ over 120 staff directly
as Ford Motor Company in New Zealand,
but more importantly across Arta.
Our dealerships span all the way from Kerry all the way down
to the beautiful bottom of the south island and Gore
and support over 1800 families through, uh,
through employment globally.
Ford is committed to a sustainable future
and we are pursuing very ambitious goals
of being carbon neutral across our vehicles manufacturing
facilities and supply chain.
By 2050 New Zealand's Clean Car Standard has sent a clear
signal to the industry to introduce efficient
and low emission vehicles to the market.
And we are proud to offer a range
of capable electrified vehicles to New Zealand consumers
and businesses such as a Mackey SUV Eran van,
and more recently the Ranger PHU.
However, our experience is
that the Clean car standard exceeds the ability
of the automotive sector to deliver the electrified vehicles
that our customers need an uptake
of full EVs still remain at five to 6%.
We are concerned
that the current approach will increase cost
for consumers without lifting the speed that Ford
or other manufacturers can supply low emission
vehicles to the market.
We're asking the government to take concrete action
to improve the operation
of the Clean Car standard at no cost to the taxpayer,
incentivizing more buyers to choose low
or zero emissions vehicles.
And we ask for the Parliament six things to consider
establish New Zealand as a fast follower,
adopting achievable emission actions from other markets
with a delay of three years, incentivize fully electric
and other low emitting technologies like PHE
and emerging electrified segments like pickups
and vans, which are, which are capable of greater work,
that it does not replace the current weight-based CO2
targets with uniform targets.
These would penalize larger
and more capable vehicles,
including those serving critical functions
for our communities and our businesses
to treat off-road SUVs as commercial vehicles
for the purposes of clean car standard, consistent
with the US and with Australia that you proceed
with extending the lifespan of credits from three
to four years as proposed.
And lastly, introduce electrified vehicles. Sorry.
Lastly include electric electrified vehicles, which are,
which due to the extra weight of their battery fall outside
of the current light commercial vehicle category
with a scheme to earn credits.
Today I'm joined by Paul Ultimore,
our Australian Zealand regulatory team lead,
and also Dan Curtis, who is our Director
of Government Affairs Australia, New Zealand.
And we're happy to answer any questions from our
submission. Thank you. Thanks Elise.
Thanks Elise. Thank you all.
We've got about just over six minutes, uh, questions folks.
Carlos, do you wanna kick me off with one? Okay, Dan. Okay,
Thanks Annalise.
Um, we've heard in some of the submissions
around the mismatch between, um, demand and supply.
I'm wondering if you can tell us from Ford's perspective,
what, in terms of the import import
of vehicles in New Zealand, how, what proportion of
of yours are ev versus hybrid versus
um, other standard?
Yeah, I, I would say that, uh,
when the scheme first kicked off, we had a strong mix into,
uh, EV and hybrid over time.
That's obviously disseminated due to supply,
but if, if we go back to where the consumers, uh,
are buying, they are sitting, uh,
largely at the EV is very small, again, it's only 6%.
We're seeing a small swing into hybrid
and that's really matching our portfolio.
So think for Ford here
and feel free, uh, port to jump in at any time.
Uh, we are seeing that demand, uh, in the categories
that we play in,
which is capable categories not really lift where we need it to be.
And I think all manufacturers are feeling
that across New Zealand, and that's not every segment.
That's the segments we play within. Yeah,
So, so just to be clear, you are seeing a misalignment
between what, uh, the, um,
clean car vehicle approach seems to want
and what the market wants.
Yeah, there, there, there definitely isn't a misalignment
and you can see that purely in the data.
Um, and the challenge is the technology,
and I think you've probably heard other
manufacturers say the same thing.
The technology for certain segments to do the work
that Kiwis need to do is just not there,
particularly in the right hand vehicle market.
Okay, Cool. Um, thank you very much Elise.
I just have a question. Could you please, uh, expand on, uh,
the opposition you have towards a weight-based CO2 target?
Yeah, I might hand that one to Paul.
Yeah, so, um, we are very keen
to see the clean car stand re retain, um, uh,
let's say, uh, an allowance for heavier vehicles
to have higher allowable emissions that's consistent
with these types of schemes that,
um, operate around the world.
Um, and you know,
that's what's used in Australia is what's
used in the US though.
It's of course it's based on footprint.
And the reason for this is it clearly, um,
puts a demarcation between vehicles
that have higher capability
and vehicles that have lower capability
and weight is a good indicator of that.
So we're very keen to keep the, um, weight dependent, um,
targets, um, for, for vehicles in within the scheme
and not to remove that to flatten the targets.
Good. Cool. Thank you.
And I might just, I might just add to
that the other key pieces for,
and it's any manufacturer, right?
So certainty is really important,
particularly when you're not
manufacturing product in country.
And so when you've got uncertainty, which is
what the bill is introducing,
it makes it very difficult in terms
of future product cycle planning
because it's all based around certainty
and that that's a large investment for traditional OEMs
or manufacturers to consider.
Okay. Colleagues, other questions?
Okay, well in that case I'll give myself the luxury
of one more just, and,
and we don't make,
we don't make too many vehicles in New Zealand.
Um, don't make too, we are,
there's the old bus here, I think, but that's about it.
Um, but um, in terms of, you've,
you've suggested this being a fast follower, uh, who, what,
what are you seeing in other markets around
and obviously, um, Paul, you are,
Paul at least you are based in in Australia.
Um, what are you seeing in other markets around, um,
the world in terms of what they're acquiring
and how that relates to the, uh, to,
to the New Zealand standard and also to
what manufacturers are actually able to supply?
Yeah, I'm happy to happy to answer that.
I think what we're seeing globally is a similar situation to
what we're talking about here for New Zealand targets
that are misaligned to the available technology,
particularly in the high work capability segments
that Ford operates in, whether it's our SUVs
or our pickup vehicles
or our vans where about vehicles that can,
can carry payloads, can move passengers flexibly,
can tow and that sort of thing.
And what we find is that the available electrification
or lower emissions technology is still a number of years
behind where the targets are
for most developed markets around the world.
So the misalignment we're seeing in
New Zealand is not unique.
We talk about, um, adopting what other markets are doing
with the delay that gives New Zealand the flexibility
to adjust, um, with more,
with a longer timeframe when say Europe makes a change
or when the US makes a change.
It also recognizes the fact that the vast majority
of markets in the world where we're developing this
technology for are left hand drive markets such as China,
such as Europe, such as the us
and that we have to, um, we need time
to move those technologies into right hand drive platforms
to make them available in markets like New Zealand.
So that's, that's why we feel like the, um,
that while the initial scheme was quite aggressive
and add, um, uh, quite a, uh, ambitious target to,
to catch up or to move faster than some other, um,
jurisdictions, it's important that New Zealand recognizes
that it's, it's not a large market
and that there's work manufacturers have to do
to adapt vehicles for that environment.
Okay. And just to finish up,
follow up that, and then I'll go to Julian.
Um, so if we pursue the, their regime
as is proposed at the moment, what does that start
to look like in terms of the impact on your ability
to be able to bring vehicles in
or on what you've gotta pass on and
or on what you've gotta pass on to customers in terms
of added cost?
Well, if the, if the vehicles that we can supply
to the market with the available technology, um, uh,
and higher CO2 levels than the targets that, uh, legislate
and there'll just be a gap in terms of in, in, in, in terms
of what, um, our ability to comply with the standard.
So that means cost to consumers, um, inability
to trade effectively the trading system for us
to move credits between manufacturers who are,
have different technologies effectively locks up.
So there's no free credits available.
And a lot of what we are talking about in our proposals is
to free those credits up, um,
as these newer technologies develop
and become more available and more economically viable.
And thanks Julian. Hey, just a really quick question.
Um, just curious about why it is that, um,
that technology is so different between right hand drive
and left hand drive cars.
Like is there anything inherently about a right hand drive
vehicle that would affect the ability
to use fuel efficiency technology?
It's really about when we develop a new technology
and put into a new platform
where we can put our investment dollars first
and our investment dollars are always towards the biggest
markets first, and then we will spread the investment out
over time to make it developable in more marketplaces.
We can't invest 100% of what we need to invest
to make it available everywhere in the world all at once.
So we have to spread that investment out over years.
So left hand drive, just
because of the larger number of markets that use
that technology, they get the investment first
and then we have to adapt it into other markets
where the requirements are different.
So in the case of technology, sorry, it's not a case
of the technology is not adaptable,
it's our investment cycles to not allow us
to just dump huge chunks of money in
for every market in the world all at once.
But do you sell into uk
Um, certain products?
Yes, but it's, it's,
it's no less challenging in the UK than other
markets compared to EU 27.
Look, thank you all very much. Really appreciate that.
Thank you for having Us. Thank you.
Okay, now we've got the, uh,
motor Trades Association, so welcome.
Come, come to the table. Motor, motor Industry.
Oh, hang on, I've got Motor Trades
Association, oh, hang on, sorry.
MTA, sorry, we've got, got so the wrong way. Uh, sorry.
We should have the Motor Trades Association via Zoom.
Sorry, that's my mistake. Do you want me to go back?
Oh, say stay there if you want to. Thank you.
So do we have them there? Yep, there. Okay, cool.
Good, right?
No, they're doing it. Good afternoon.
Larry, could you turn your camera on
and unmute yourself?
There we go. That's better. Welcome. Sorry about that.
Look, thanks Larry. We've got your submission
so you can take that as read.
Um, if you wanna highlight anything, that would be great.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Uh, I'll give you a call with about three to go, um,
unless if you're still speaking.
Uh, but otherwise if you can leave time for questions,
we really appreciate that and,
uh, we'll get ourselves underway. Thank
You. Thank you
Mr. Chair.
And thank you the select committee
for giving us the opportunity to present here today.
Uh, as mentioned, my name's Larry Fell Field.
I'm the sector manager for the Motor Trade Association,
or MTA as we're known.
Um, I look after the motor vehicle dealer space
and we represent over 4,000 members across New Zealand
and about 60,000 employees, uh,
in the motor vehicle trader space.
We have over 500 members ranging from new franchise
to used Importers, motorcycle, motor home Caravan,
and believe it or not, Marine.
So, um, look, thanks for the opportunity to, as I say
to present here today, we've sort
of raised a few different concerns
and supportive of, of what our new franchise, um,
partners have said, Gil Traps and Ford in, in that space.
Um, we took a slightly different approach in looking at some
of the challenges that are faced that ADD
that may be amplified by this change.
And that was the fact that since its peak in 2017, over 900,
um, registered motor vehicle traders have gone outta
business or closed up.
So about a seven 27% decrease, which is, um,
which is, which is quite big.
And that has continued to carry on.
We've seen about 198 close so far this year.
Um, or whether that's from liquidation
or just actually going, you know what, let's, let's pull out
of this area 'cause it's not viable for us anymore.
I suppose the thing in the used import space,
we've seen a big decline in the numbers
of used imports, uh, being sold.
Uh, at the same time we've also seen an increase in the cost
of, uh, uh, bringing in used imports and,
and some of those costs of being around the fact
of being able to get good cars.
Uh, given that a couple of years ago, uh,
Japan put a ban on on Russia.
Um, but since then we've seen a big uptake from the likes
of Mongolia and UAE, so we're sort of competing.
The other thing that's happened is, is quite,
we're always compared to Australia,
and yet our market is still slightly different.
Uh, Australia have very low volumes of imported vehicles.
Uh, we have a high number of imported vehicles,
but the Australians are starting to pick up in that space.
To give you an example, in 2021, New Zealand sort
of imported about, uh, 105,000 units.
Uh, Australia was about 13,000.
And then in 24, um, new Zealand's dropped to 81,000,
uh, and Australia's picked up to about 21.
So we compete in that used import space in China, uh, sorry,
in Japan against lots of players around the globe.
And that puts pressure on getting vehicles here.
So back to, uh, what we are seeing,
and it probably reflective of what, uh,
everybody else has mentioned so far this morning that, um,
we're, we seen a big uptake
with the clean car discount with EVs.
Uh, and that has come back to, to be sitting at about seven
or 8% of the total, uh, vehicles being sold at the moment.
Um, and it followed behind that across is the battery
electric vehicles, uh, sorry, battery electric is, uh,
PH EVs plugin hybrids.
They're sitting at about 4%.
And, and the big part
of the market at the moment is obviously the,
the hybrid electric vehicles.
Now they're currently sitting at about 38% of the market,
which is a big jump from where we were probably five
or six years ago.
And I think we're in this transition period now
where people are looking at, at hybrid electric vehicles
as a stepping stone into the next category.
So, um, a step from ICE or,
or internal combustion, standard petrol diesel into
that hybrid space is, is a, as I say, a transition period.
Once people get used to driving those,
then potentially we'll see more people, um, uptake with PS
and then battery electric vehicles from that space.
But it's gonna take time to do that.
And as um, and at lease from Ford mentioned, you know,
there's, we New Zealand we're dominated by small
to medium businesses.
And in that work, what we call,
I suppose a good old workhorse, whether
that's a Ford Ranger Ute
or a Toyota Hilux are, are a big part of, um,
what is used in, in that space in New Zealand.
Um, and that technology is, is changing at a fast, rapid,
not, uh, fast rate of knots,
but not fast enough to get us to where we need to be.
Um, so some of our concerns were around that, the system
that we had with the clean card discount, which, um,
which helped drag themselves
through perhaps advantaged some people
and disadvantaged some others.
And then as the, as the guys from general, uh,
deal Traps mentioned when that discount came off, um,
dealers were,
and manufacturers were stuck
with electric battery electric vehicles here in New Zealand
that they tried to move at a lower price point better than
what was being offered while the clean car discount was on.
Uh, but unfortunately it was just a slow uptake.
Uh, for some reason I think people thought
that getting money in the hand was better than actually the,
the sale price of the vehicle
or the purchase price of the vehicle.
Um, so some of the things that, that we've sort of looked at
as maybe the whole system needs to have a rethink.
Um, our concern is that, uh, our current age
of our vehicles in New Zealand is, is nearing 16 years old.
Um, if you compare that
to places like the US sitting at probably 12
or 13 years, uh, the UK sits at around that nine
to 10 year age gap.
Um, and Australia sits at around between 11 and 12.
And so how do we bring the age of those vehicles down,
which is a, a key critical part of, uh,
or should be a critical part of this ongoing discussion.
Um, I think some
of the challenges we have is we think about cars
that are 25 years old.
Uh, and a stat I I recently sort of looked at sort of said
that 40, nearly close to 50% of our vehicles are over
that 15 year age gap.
Um, if you think about a car that's a 19
or a 2000 year old, a 2000 year, uh, 25 years old now,
it doesn't look any different than a modern vehicle.
Whereas if you were in the, in the year 2000
and we're looking at a car 25 years old,
a 1975 car was a big difference in style.
So we sort of have a, a, a view, I suppose, of what's
around us that it looks actually perhaps older
than it actually is.
Um, from that side,
Larry, you've got just over three minutes left.
Okay. So just quickly, I'll just finish up with what some
of our recommendations were, uh, you know, and,
and some of those were, uh, have been mentioned
before, looking at rux, looking at time use of vehicle, uh,
we see those as probably a more beneficial way of, of, uh,
of looking at the clean car vehicles
and reducing emissions versus, versus, um, trying
to put a a, a cost increase on to, uh, to the consumer,
which is what we think will happen should the,
the program keep going in its current form.
Okay, thanks. Any, Any questions?
Thank you, Larry. Just check
to see are there any questions, colleagues?
That all makes sense? No, look, I, I think,
I think Larry, the, the challenge there is you've told us
very similar things than we've heard from the other two, um,
before you, uh, or the other three before you.
And, um, and so I think we've, we've got
that picture, so I really appreciate,
I hope so because we do represent industry,
so hopefully we're not too far
off the mark with what they're saying. So
Look, thank you very much.
You very much. Cheers. Bye-bye.
Right. Amy, welcome.
My name's Amy Wiley
and I'm the Chief executive of the
Motor Industry Association.
Um, the Motor Industry Association represents all the new,
all the new OEMs and quarters distributors
and the retail networks.
Uh, we've got 96 brands here in New Zealand now,
and the my A represents, um, so that's approximately 99%
of all new vehicles sold in the country, uh,
spanning light vehicles, motorcycles,
on and off road and heavies.
In terms of our, um, concerns
around the clean vehicle standard, I wanna start by saying
that the credit flexibility mechanisms
are absolutely crucial.
They formed part of an agreement
and our advice back in the 2024 Clean,
clean Car Standard Review, which is now called,
called Clean Vehicle Standard.
Um, and we've been waiting
that the industry's been eagerly awaiting this, this bill
for these changes because the system's really not
functioning as intended.
And the clean car discount
and the Clean Car standard were both brought in
as tandem policies.
And to use a human analogy, like a heart, a lung
or a brain is a left and a right side.
And at the moment with no,
with no incentive on consumers to stimulate demand.
And I'm not advocating to bring back a clean car discount,
but the messaging isn't even there either.
So not only have we taken away, um, demand side stimulation,
we've penalized electric vehicles
by putting policy costs on top road user charges
before the rest of the fleet that, um,
a CC levies being redu exemption being reduced,
everything has sent a signal to consumer sentiment that EVs
that the total cost of ownership's not there
anymore in terms of the benefit.
And actually now it's not the time for EVs,
we're not worried about our missions anymore.
And so with that sentiment, it's harder than ever
for the new vehicle industry to shift these vehicles.
And when the policy change came in with three months notice,
um, there were thousands of cars stranded.
These are cars that already had very tight margins
because of high research and, um, r and d and,
and a whole lot of costs to get them here to try
and meet demand and uptake, which at the time was 23%.
In New Zealand we were breaking records globally at 23%.
Now we're stuck at about five to 7%. And that's not unusual.
I mean, Australia's got similar challenges.
Canada's got similar challenges,
Europe, us the whole lot, right?
I hope that's not my time, that's
Not your time. Sorry, that's me having
not, not,
uh, fixed the previous one. So,
Right. Thank you.
Seven minutes. Seven minutes to go.
But it's a really, it's a really big problem
that's also combined in a really big economic
challenging time for the country.
So not only did they have to drop prices in order to try
and shift these units, 'cause they couldn't stop the
boats, they couldn't turn them around.
And what's worse is for a lot of battery electric cars
that we had here, we couldn't even ship 'em off to Australia
because they might not have been a DR compliant, um, just
because of a child restraint.
So the problem is that the industry's already taken a hit
and the cost will be larger than what it was to,
to remove the clean car discount.
Now they're faced with how many do I order?
'cause I don't wanna get stuck with more what's consumer
demand really gonna be.
Now the MIA has been leading this.
We've engaged with every single member
and we are undertaking a nine month project.
We will, we will be doing economic modeling
and com, uh, independent economic modeling
and consumer demand forecasting
for the bigger clean vehicle review next year.
But what I wanted to say today is this is the number one
issue facing the industry right now.
We do not have enough credits.
We are running out, we are burning through them faster.
But what's even more alarming
and concerning is that there's only a few
importers holding them all.
There's three or four importers holding all the credits
and they're not being fairly traded with others.
Penalties are very, very real.
And right now, the MIA knows
that it's about a hundred million dollars this year
and next year it's gonna be $200 million.
And none of that comes to the government.
That's all going to the richest man in the
world to buy his credits.
There's no emission benefit
and we're not getting any further forward.
And that's really disappointing for the MIA
because we are here as an independent industry association
that's apolitical, trying to do our best to make sure
that we are putting the cleanest, safest,
newest cars on the road to the benefit of everyday kiwis.
And what we need is a competitive marketplace that is,
that is thriving so that we get access
to the latest technology at the lowest price points.
Credit flexibility mechanisms would even the the playing
field, it would've had more
of an impact two years ago than it does now, simply
because with fewer credits they've become more scarce.
So adding the use sector and now just means more people
competing for the fewer credits.
However, long term, if we get the settings reset,
those flexibility mechanisms will be crucial
to every importer achieving their, their targets.
Now I would like to move on to the weight adjustment factor,
and I wanna explain why we will not support it at this time.
The removal of it, whether it's, whether a change
to weight adjustment is in primary legislation
or secondary legislation
or tertiary legislation, that is not,
that is not the question here, right?
But what we wanted to use with this is
taking it outta primary legislation
and putting it into secondary regulation.
And, and it puts an element of risk for the industry there
because it won't go appro
through a process like this if the weight adjustment's
removed, it can be done if it's in a regulation,
it can be done with a targeted consultation
and a ministerial decision.
And the reason that is so concerning
for the industry right now is
because of the impact it would have if, if we moved
to universal targets too soon.
And the reason being, it means one target for all,
which means that the number of credits
that an EV will earn will drop and the number of debits
or penalties that every other vehicle will incre will,
will earn increase.
So the gap gets wider. We need that weight adjustment now
until we've got a stable market,
until we've got a certain level
of EV uptake where it's justified.
But more importantly,
the MIA members are divided over whether we should have a
weight adjustment long term.
Because in every other country of the world,
nobody tinkers with weight adjustment.
They have a slope of the curve and it's set and that's it.
They bring down the actual target
headlines and some other things.
But it's, it's, it's a contentious issue.
And given that achievability
of co targets is a global problem,
uh, we're not immune to that.
We are concerned for that reason.
We don't want to do anything
that's gonna make our problem bigger.
And removing weight adjustment will make the problem bigger.
We will earn for every, for those 5% of EVs
that we're currently struggling to sell
and at, at, at massive losses, for most,
they will end fewer credits to offset
what consumers are currently buying.
Now the last point I'd like to make, uh, is
that we've got no control over what people buy.
The original intention of the CVS was
that if importers change their mix
of product they brought in
and they bought enough lower emission
to offset higher emission, they could achieve it.
But what about in the current market where if they did that,
they would be sitting on thousands of units they can't sell
because consumer demand has gone so far back the other way,
carry, carry, finish what you're gonna say,
consumer demand has gone so far back the other way that the,
the, the economic reality in any given market is
supply will always meet demand.
And unless we can do something as a country
to stimulate demand, there will always be somebody.
And it doesn't matter whether one brand caps their volumes
and tries to do the right thing to get to,
to meet a Paris Accord in 2050, net zero, we'll get a new
importer come from a Chinese
or another part of the world
that will hap more than happily meet the
market and shift volume.
The the problem that we need to solve is we need to get
as much credit flexibility
and as possible we need to not make the problem worse
or bigger than we've got today.
But we also need to think really carefully about
what the system looks like, what good looks like,
what achievable looks like,
and how we are going to shift the transition from 5% to,
at the moment in the legislation, 50% by 2029, 50%
of all new cars for us to achieve it this year it's 20%
for light passenger and we're at five, next year it's 25
and we are forecasting seven
or eight, then it goes up to 30, 40, 50.
The ambition year on year on year is going in
the opposite direction.
And it's a concern and it's a concern not only
because of the, the, the extended penalties,
but it's a concern for our environment
and the amount of emissions that are we are adding
to the fleet every year that will be in
the carbon will continue for 20 odd years.
So what we do today, we need
to make it easy to do the right thing.
Okay, thank you. Thanks Julianne.
Um, thank you so much for your submission Amy.
Um, uh, obviously we are hearing contradictory things from
other submitters about whether we should get rid of the, um,
weight adjustment or retain it.
Um, although I think majority
of people are saying to retain it.
Uh, you mentioned it's a controversial, um,
there is some controversy
'cause it sort of penalizes less efficient smaller vehicles.
Um, I actually was just
Wondering, can I just explain that?
Yeah, yeah. So you are right about that.
It does penalize the light of the very small light vehicles.
Uh, and in our submission we had advocated for a lift
of the minimum vehicle weight up
to be the mean vehicle weight in line with
what Australia does because that would remove that.
Okay? Right. That means the small vehicles
that are very efficient and are penalized
because of their weight would not be adversely penalized.
However, on the whole, if we were to go
to a universal target, we'd have to think about what
that target was because at the moment,
112 grams on a light passenger in 2025 when we are currently
tracking at about 148 grams actual,
and with, with the majority of cars
that consumers are buying that are in the medium large,
extra large ECV segment, that might be 188.
You know, it, it just comes down to where we want to be. Um,
I mean I think it's interesting that just
Keep it, keep it quickest One.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, I guess you mentioned that there,
the vehicle industry can't influence what people buy.
Um, yet a lot of the advertising that, um, props up,
you know, on television
or in, you know, newspapers, magazines, is
for vehicle advertising.
Um, do you think that instead of a direct price incentive,
if there was some limitations, so let's say, uh,
there was no, you know,
you shouldn't be advertising higher emissions vehicles
that would help influence consumer demand?
That is a law that's been brought in in France.
Um, and so that, you know, and then it's,
This can answer Julian.
I think that's gonna be really hard to do if I could see
that in segments where there's genuine, um, variety
and mode of power choice in the segments.
So if we talk about like light passenger for example,
we talk about where we get our
cars and who's designing them.
Light passenger, uh, small light passenger,
largely Europe already been on the trajectory.
There's a lot more zero emission and lower emission.
Whereas we think about Utes or, or large SUVs
or even those with bladder chassis that are unique
to our market where America isn't really there,
they don't really sell those utes in America.
So they're still very high emission.
It would be hard to put a ban on advertising those when now
the number one vehicle that a lot of, you know, kiwi trades
or farmers need and there's not a real
equivalent yet in the market. So,
Okay. No, no, no. Julianne,
I'm gonna cut that one there.
Now I can. Very quick one because
otherwise we've got one more
submitter and we will run out of time. Thank you
Jamie. Um, the question
is about,
really quickly about the credit flexibility mechanisms.
Yes. Of how, so, um, sort of made,
made a point in your submission a little bit about perhaps
some, um, vehicle importers
or manufacturers, uh, keeping those, uh, credits.
How do you think this bill, um, could be improved
to enable flexibility
and sort of, there's an ability for training to happen
or transfers to happen, but how,
but there's not, how do you make sure that that
what you've seen in your submission
needs to happen? Does it?
Yeah, I think there's an opportunity to go further.
'cause it's not just about the life of the credit and,
and, uh, whether or not you can bank your overachievement
or, or defer your underachievement.
I think there's another opportunity
and that would be transparent trading.
Um, I think if there was a register
and you were transparently showing what,
what credits are being traded
and who's not trading, it would be very, very obvious
for those who don't need them
and are holding them in an un
unwilling to trade with other importers. Okay.
And okay, Then we have to call it there.
Amy, thank you very much. Quite a few things there.
And actually there's a few we probably wanna
follow up with given that
We didn't have. Yes, not a problem. Happy to
take follow ups.
Appreciate happy you provide any extra
additional information that we
Do that Clark. Thank
you. Thanks Amy. Brilliant. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, and last but not least, uh, Hyundai,
Hyundai Motors by Zoom.
And so we've got, uh, we've got 'em down for 10 minutes,
so we will just escape, uh, in time.
The bells will be started by the time we've finished.
But, uh, and then the other,
one other thing we've gotta do is
instruct a departmental report.
People happy for that? Wellton. Ready Layton, welcome.
Leighton Agnew, general manager New Zealand.
We've got you down for 10 minutes
and uh, the time starts now.
If you can leave some time for questions.
We appreciate that. The bells will probably start, um,
before we have finished.
In fact, I will start before we finished.
Yeah, right. Okay. Where you go.
Cool. Uh, Hyundai New Zealand is proud to be locally owned
and operated for the last 43 years.
Uh, we represent 28, uh,
fantastic dealers throughout the, this, this great country.
Um, as an industry we we're currently not meeting
our CO2 targets.
Uh, the current clean cast standard targets significantly
outpace consumer demand
and risk undermining affordability, vehicle choice,
and the credibility of the New Zealand CO2 policy.
These costs imposed on Kiwis are highly inflationary.
New Zealanders are paying more to upgrade
to newer vehicles even when transitioning
to lower emission vehicles.
Product that is required
to be cost neutral under the CCS is not
yet available globally at price points New Zealand
consumers are able to afford.
For example, there are no vehicles
that meet current targets in the sub 30 K price segment.
Uh, this affordable segment currently accounts for 18%
of current, uh, current sales.
New vehicle technology is continuously evolving.
However, New Zealand has no bearing
on how quickly it develops.
As more product is made available,
consumers are moving towards these new technologies such
as hybrid that can now, uh, uh, equals 38%
of the passenger vehicles sold.
So people are moving towards these vehicles.
Um, so we,
uh, generally, uh, agree with, uh, the MIA submission as,
as Amy just pointed out,
but we do have three um, points that we would like to,
to uh, highlight.
Okay. If I can go to the next slide please. Yep. Thank you.
We've got that. So Cool.
Um, so Hindu New Zealand proposes drop in the penalty
rate to $10 per gram.
Uh, our modeling suggests that, uh, based on current mix,
a total of just under
or just $678 million in penalties will be, uh, payable to
by the end of 2027.
That's at the current, uh, current vehicle mix.
Uh, under current settings, 81%
of hybrid vehicles will incur penalty of between 800
and dollars and $6,000.
From 2026.
Um, a reduction in the fee will keep the incentive in place
for brands to lower emissions without penalizing Kiwi
consumers over
and above the impact
of high fees are incentivizing startup brands
with no known history
to the New Zealand market for arbitrage.
There is well publicized expectation many
of these startup brands will falter in the coming years,
which will place New Zealand consumers
and small businesses with warranty risks, uh,
when they exit the market.
Uh, next slide please. Uh, second point is,
uh, we, uh, back the proposal for a one, uh, a, uh,
credit trade between new and used.
However, we think this should be done at a one to one rate.
Uh, the used car credits currently, uh, 50%
of the new car credits, uh, the average age
of our national fleet continues to increase,
meaning the older, higher emitting
and less safe vehicles are on the road for longer.
Uh, we're now out to 15 years as an average, uh,
average age new vehicle prices will continue
to fall under the proposed changes benefiting consumers
and allowing them to access newer, lower emitting vehicles.
The one-to-one ratio removes the incentive
to move towards these older options.
Next slide. Uh, the third, the third, uh, amendment
to to, to this, the submission is
that we think we should be, uh, being clear, clear, clear
to our, our consumers and, uh,
and adding the, this is a line item in in sale agreements.
Um, this increases the transparency, transparency
for Kiwi consumers, allowing them
to make better informed decisions
and is in line with how the tire wise
fees are currently
communicated. Any questions?
Alright, thank you. Uh, thanks very much.
There will definitely be questions.
Dan, did you have a question or,
Oh, no, I just thought you're, um, Julia.
Okay. Uh, actually I was just gonna remark, um, your idea
around the trend, uh, um, visibility.
It's always a good thing, right? Good idea, Julia. Um, um,
I was just kind of confused about how you could show that
if overall the fees like on a per vehicle basis,
because doesn't it have to do with the mix of vehicles
and importers selling?
So like you can't really attribute it to a particular
vehicle and if it were like mandated then wouldn't you have
to put the equivalent of a, of no fee
or like a, you know, for like, if people are selling EVs,
that's helping them sell more higher emissions vehicles?
Yep. So, uh, each vehicle has a, has a, an impact on the,
you know, the negative correlation to, uh, fees and
or credits and debits.
So it's quite simple to to, to look at a vehicle
and look at their CO2 and wait
and, um, calculate what the, what the, um,
charge would be for customers.
Um, with regards to, with regards to lower matting vehicles,
I would suggest that you have that as a zero zero line.
So no fee, no no fee.
So that would give the customer the, the, the, the certainty
that okay, I can see that I'm buying this car
and there's $2,000 worth of fee that I'm paying to,
to this car and if I choose another
car, I will be paying zero.
So they can make that decision based on, you know,
that transparent information.
And is there anything stopping you from doing that?
Like why does government have to mandate it?
Couldn't you just do that anyway?
My understanding is that we can't,
can, cannot do that currently.
You, you couldn't just put that on your own invoice
and pricing information.
Why not? Is it forbidden somehow?
Uh, my understanding is it's not,
it is not, it's not allowed.
Yeah.
Find out to ask. Okay. Something we can follow up anyway.
Um, okay. Other, other questions colleagues?
Layton, can I just ask one, um, uh,
one question which is just is you said there are no vehicles
currently and,
and no new vehicles, I'm assuming that's what you mean?
Yeah, currently, um, under 30 Ks
that meet the target under $30,000
that meet the target are the, I mean,
how many vehicles actually do meet?
And that's the current target of course,
which means they may not meet the target next year
or the year after or the year after that.
I mean, are the, are there many at any part of the market?
Uh, off the top of my head, I don't know the answer to
that, but we could, we could find that answer pretty
Quickly. It, it, it, it
would be interesting to see
what actually does meet the market
and what, what doesn't meet the, meet the market, oh,
sorry. Meet the, um, the standard.
I would suggest that, you know, just looking at that from,
from January, 2026, you know, 80% of, uh,
all the hybrids on the market don't, won't meet it.
So you know that, that, that, that means
that all ice cars basically don't meet it.
Um,
Yeah. Got that. So I,
I'll just ask one other question then I go
can, so the, the numbers that you've given us in
that Thanks Tracy, the numbers you've given us
that $678 million, if I do a quick division, we,
we get about 300,000 new vehicles a year,
I think into New Zealand. Might
Be three. Oh no, round numbers
a hundred Currently about 125,000.
Okay. So that, that, so that means
that the average cost must be something
of the order about 1500?
No, it'd be slightly, it might be $2,000 average cost per
per vehicle, which would be, um, applied.
Yep. Correct. Yeah, so, so the, you know, it's just, um,
you know, kind of middle of the range hybrid mid,
mid-size SUV would be attracting a $2,000
penalty from next year,
2000 penalty.
Okay. And it's not, not attracting anything at the moment.
Uh, some will attract a minimal charge at the moment,
but, um, some, some don't.
It's really kicking in next year then. Okay. Cool. Cam,
Thank you Laden. And we've
heard now, um, the committee's now heard that,
you know, um, the market's being distorted
and we need more demand side to go with the supply side.
You've just told us that 80%
of hybrids don't even meet this standard.
Would it be better if we just completely got rid of it?
Um, that is, that is, that is an, that is an option. Yes.
Um, but there is, there is still a reason to to, to con
to continue to push, you know, brands towards, um,
you know, lowering emissions.
But, um, you know, I think if you look back at, you know,
from the last maybe 10 years, the industry is getting
to a lower CO2 level anyway.
The traject trajectory is already on, is where we, where we,
you know, for the last kind of
five years is where we are now.
And has the rules in New Zealand, in your opinion,
changed the way overseas, um,
companies have decided on their manufacturing pipeline?
Uh, not, not for us, no. Thank you.
Thank, thank you very much.
The one last thing, thank you very much.
The one last thing we've gotta do is
to instruct a departmental report.
We're all happy to do that. Cool.
And I think we'll have a bit of a debrief
and some, uh, conversation probably next week if.